# Police Shootings - R Shiny Dashboard

The issue of police brutality has been a topic in the news for quite some time. The media tends to blame police brutality on racism, so I decided to look into the data and determine if the media’s claims are backed up by evidence (spoiler: I went into this assuming they are). For my project, I decided to build an interactive dashboard using R Shiny to examine police-involved killing data published by the Washington Post, which dates back to 2015. To build the dashboard, I learned and used R Shiny. I learned a lot about R Shiny, and data wrangling, cleaning, and visualization. My thoughts and findings on the data and visualizations themselves can be found in the dashboard. Here, I will be talking about my experience, what I learned, and what I wish I had more time for.

The data I used comes from the Washington Post, the United States Census, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Crime Statistics. The Washington Post has a great, straightforward CSV file on Github that provides national data on victims of police shootings. I used the United States Census data to get statistics of ethnic makeups in America. The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Crime Statistics data was utilized to examine the proportional differences of crimes committed by men and women.

I learned R Shiny through various resources including Datacamp, R Shiny documentation on their website, and flexdashboard documentation. There were great examples and straightforward explanations on all three resources. I found that it was way easier to understand how to code the dashboard in R Markdown using flexdashboard versus using the R Shiny Code in xxxx. At first, I thought I would use the R Shiny code - I thought that taking the “hard route” would help me to learn the intricacies of Shiny better. I think that going that route did help me learn about coding the interactivity of the dashboard, but I wish I had taken the easy route and used flexdashboard in RMarkdown in the first place. I spent a lot of time debugging my Shiny code when it wasn’t working. The mistakes that I made ended up being due to a lack of understanding of how HTML and the UI portion of the Shiny code actually function. It took me a lot less time to understand how to code in Markdown. I am already adept at coding in Markdown so all I had to learn to create a Shiny dashboard in RMarkdown was basic formatting (such as how to create a new tab in the dashboard) and how to make my visualizations interactive.

There is a lot of data analysis that I wish I had time for. First, I want to dig into specific regions and cities in America and analyze how fatal police shooting metrics differ, if they do. Next, I’d like to get data that goes further back than 2015. However, I don’t believe there is a central database for that so finding, joining, and cleaning various datasets could take some time. I also wish I would have included more scholarly research in my analysis. I’d like to compare deaths in regions of the country that have different policing strategies. Lastly, I’d like to compare predominantly Republican (red) and Democratic (blue) states. Our country has been divided for a while and I would like to see if the divisive, inflammatory claims (the right is doing this! The left is doing that!) have any merit in this context. 

This project was incredible. I am so glad I have R Shiny skills in my toolbox. The biggest hurdle was actually learning how to create the dashboard and format it since I already had quite a few data cleaning and analysis skills from the project we completed in Econ 731. I recommend this project to anyone who is looking to improve their data analysis skills and wants to use a free tool to do so. 
